remember we reviewed the comorbidity
data which suggested that people who
maladaptive daydream have a very lot
high likelihood
of other psychiatric illnesses so does
that mean that it is a new illness
which is completely independent from
these other illnesses
no
so i want to talk to you all today about
something called maladaptive daydreaming
which we've seen a lot of so someone
posted this
five months ago addicted to daydreaming
i've never experienced boredom in my
life
my addiction to daydreaming is ruining
my life i'm struggling with maladaptive
daydreaming every waking day i i have i
spent three or more hours obsessively
daydreaming about
this perfect me achieving the stupidly
impossible goal that will never actually
happen
this escapism of mine is is out of
control being addicted to daydreaming
addicted to self-improvement while not
improving it's a little bit different
hi dr k what are your thoughts about
maladaptive daydreaming
so this is something that's huge within
our community you guys can kind of see
that this is like you know there's a
post on this every couple weeks months
um
and and the truth is that maladaptive
daydreaming is is something of a new
phenomenon
um
and let me see if i can find a good uh
so
like people are not exactly sure so
maladaptive daydreaming is a newly
proposed
mental disorder characterized by
excessive vivid fantasy activity
impairing functioning
we'll get to the rest in a second
so today i'd like to talk to you all
about maladaptive daydreaming so this is
going to be a little bit more of an
academic talk okay
so what i mean by that is we're going to
go into a lot of different papers we're
going to talk about a lot of
neuroscience we're going to talk about
some fundamental principles of
psychology and psychiatry in clinical
medicine and diagnosis
and then we'll also talk a little bit
about you know how to weave this
together so what is the neuroscience of
maladaptive daydreaming
how does it manifest why does it
manifest what are the issues at play why
is it happening why is it happening now
more than ever why does it happen
potentially in our population in our
community more than potentially other
populations in other communities and
then finally potentially what to do
about it
so the first thing that i want to start
out is by talking to you all a little
bit about the way that a psychiatric
diagnosis works okay
so in psychiatry
when i say that you know someone has
depression do you understand what we
mean by that like what is depression do
you all know
okay so someone's saying checks all the
boxes
okay
so this is the first thing to understand
about psychiatric illness so people are
hypothesizing that maladaptive
daydreaming is a new diagnosis
so before we kind of get into it a
little bit further
we have to understand what the nature of
a psychiatric diagnosis is so if i say
that someone has an anxiety disorder
or has a depressive disorder
or has ocd
the first thing that i want you all to
understand are adhd let's do that
actually that's a good one
the first thing that i want you all to
understand is that none of these are
like real things they're not objects or
consequences they're not objects
they're what we call in medicine we call
them syndromes
so syndromes are collections
of observable criteria
and what that means is that if someone
in chat put it they check the boxes
so in order to have an anxiety disorder
or a depressive disorder you have to
check two out of these three boxes
and so any given person may check
slightly different boxes so depression
is not it doesn't exist the same in
every single person
it's a constellation
of symptoms that we kind of lump
together
and then we say you have this thing
but we're not really it's not like a
physical illness like let's say i have
heart failure so in heart failure for
example there's a discrete problem where
the heart is not
pumping
enough right so if i have something
called congestive heart failure that
means that my heart has become overly
congested and is not able to pump
effectively because of this thing called
starling's law
so in in physical medicine we have like
discrete you know
diagnoses that like actually exist and
you can biopsy them you can x-ray them
you can mri them etc but in mental
health for example
we don't really have those we have
syndromes and so it's not like i can
actually biopsy someone or x-ray someone
or do a blood test with someone and
discover that they have depression
it's do they check enough boxes
and sometimes in psychiatry things get
really really confusing because you can
also have something called an anxious
depression
so you can actually have an illness
that pulls a couple of boxes from
anxiety
and pulls a couple of boxes from
depression
and so does this person have anxiety
plus depression or do they have an
anxious depression do they have two
discrete neurological processes or
psychiatric processes going on or do
they have one process
going on in their brain that looks like
these two sets of constellations right
so if i have like dots
and
you know is this is this something that
looks
i'm screwed up
right is this something that looks like
an a
or is it a square or what like what is
this
are these five dots a square or an a
well well sort of both and neither
they're just five dots
and so if i'm looking for a square i can
find a square but if i'm looking for an
a i can find an a too but the dots is
what's real
the a and the square are the
constellations or syndromes that we kind
of apply on top of them are you guys
getting this
this make sense
so now we're going to get to this
concept of
maladaptive daydreaming
as a new diagnosis
so what maladaptive daydreaming is
is essentially this like
syndrome where people will daydream for
hours at a time
to the point where it starts to impair
their function they can't concentrate
they can't focus on schoolwork they're
not able to work they're not even able
sometimes to have fun and play video
games or engage in relationships so they
daydream so much and so often that
impairs them from doing other things in
life
so let's try to understand what's going
on in the neuroscience
of maladaptive daydreaming
okay
and so this is where i'm gonna start by
saying the short answer is we don't know
but there are some really interesting
things that some studies have taught us
so let's take a look at some
um
let's take a look at some studies okay
so this is a study that's looking at the
comorbidity of daydreaming disorder so
what this means is that if i have
someone who has maladaptive daydreaming
what other illnesses are they likely to
have and so when you do structured
interviews
so
um
so what this means is that 74 of people
met criteria for three additional
disorders that is insane
41 of uh people met criteria for four
so 76.9 percent of people met criteria
for adhd
this is nuts right so if i take someone
what is that 76.9 percent
this means that if i take someone with
maladaptive daydream if i take a hundred
people with maladaptive daydreaming and
i test them for adhd
76.9 will have adhd okay so for anxiety
the number is 71.8 percent
okay
and um
yeah so we're going to just focus on
those two right now okay so what this
sort of means is that if you look at
maladaptive daydreaming there is a very
high comorbidity with adhd and we know
that the brains of people with adhd are
somewhat different and i go into that in
a lot of detail if you look at the adhd
and addiction and adhd and depression
video okay
so there's a high co-morbidity which
tells me that when we're talking about
maladaptive and daydreaming
it's not an a or a square this is a sort
of situation where there's a lot of
shared points
does that make sense and we when we look
at anxiety there's a lot of shared
points so this is sort of a situation
where if i string these together in this
way i end up with anxiety if i string
them together this way
i end up with maladaptive daydreaming so
i can make all kinds of shapes or i can
make a
house so we as we as we'll see that
there are other things kind of going on
as well so maladaptive daydreaming
dissociation and dissociative disorders
so when it comes to dissociation and
trauma
there's a very tight comorbidity here as
well
where um you know people who have
a lot of dissociation also tend to have
uh maladaptive daydreaming and there's
also similarities with ocd
okay so now this is kind of weird
because we have you know very high
comorbidity with this let's say like i
forget what the number is i think ocd
was like 50 right
and dissociation and trauma
i'm not sure exactly what the number is
there but it tends to be high
so now the question is like let's just
think about this for a second okay does
that mean that people are running around
with adhd and maladaptive daydreaming
and maladaptive daydreaming and anxiety
so are these two separate discrete
processes is this an a brand new
diagnosis which is completely different
from the things that we've seen before
and this is where my take is that not
really so i think what we're starting to
see and here's how i'd put it so let's
like think about what daydreaming is
so daydreaming
is kind of getting lost in fantasy right
it's not being able to focus
which in turn means you're kind of
losing track
of where you are
okay does this make sense to people
people are saying sounds like adhd
and this is where
okay so if this is how we define
daydreaming
what my hypothesis is is that adhd and
let's say dissociation
can both get here
right so there's some circuits in the
brain
so there's like dissociation circuitry
and there's a tensional circuitry
and both of these circuits if you have a
problem in either of these circuits
you can have this emergent phenomenon of
maladaptive daydreaming does that make
sense
so you could have problems with your
attention so the reason that i get lost
in daydreaming
is because i have difficulty focusing on
particular things so if my mind is
unable to focus
what that means is that i can get
distracted and lost into daydreaming
very easily but on the flip side that's
one way to get to daydreaming but you
don't have to get to daydreaming through
the unable to focus route the other way
you can get through day to day dreaming
is through dissociation so my brain is
prone to dissociate and separate from
what i'm doing in this particular time
it's not necessarily that i can't focus
it's just that the dissociation circuits
of my brain are highly active so i wind
up daydreaming because i dissociate from
where i am in time and space
and then maybe there's something with
anxiety or ocd
which also is like a third track which
can kind of lead to daydreaming
okay so daydreaming in in my kind of
limited experience and especially after
looking through the neuroscience and
stuff like that i think is an emergent
phenomenon that can come from many
different kinds of brains
okay
and so like
i think that you can sort of have this
is why we see so much maladaptive
daydreaming and sort of why it's been
lost as a diagnosis thus far is because
people end up getting diagnosed with
adhd they end up getting diagnosed with
this anxiety or trauma or ocd
and so the daydreaming sort of gets lost
within these other diagnoses
i don't know that it is a purely its own
kind of unique process going on in the
brain i would rather you know sort of
suggest that it is an emergent
phenomenon that is
coming out of the neural circuitry of
these other kinds of processes which are
well described
okay
now
let's move on to something else so then
the question is if it is an emergent
process that comes from multiple
different
neuroscientific mechanisms
why does it emerge in all three of these
situations right so if we look at like
how the brain responds so let's say
daydreaming is an outcome of an adhd
brain daydreaming is an outcome of
dissociation circuitry why does it
always happen like why isn't it that
adhd circuitry ends up with you know
manifestation a and dissociation
manifests as b
and
anxiety manifests as c
like instead of three
if we have three different brains or
three different neurological processes
why don't they look different why do
they all manifest as daydreaming that's
the next question
okay are y'all with me here by the way
is this like too much are you guys
following this
you all need
okay
so this is very good
so now someone is saying very good so
they're saying coping mechanism right so
very good so now there's a really
fascinating paper
okay
so personality traits and maladaptive
daydreaming fantasy functions and themes
in a multi-country sample so what
basically what people did is they
analyzed 539 adults who met criteria for
maladaptive daydreaming and then they
looked at their personality and what
they discovered is that there are three
common things that these people tend to
have so they tend to have
grandiosity
they tend to have
separation anxiety
and they tend to have anhedonia
okay so like oh that's interesting so
forget about the comorbidity forget
about the brain
this is now a different kind of research
this is sitting down with a human being
and asking them or analyzing okay if you
have maladaptive daydreaming what is
your personality like and what they also
found and this is what's really
fascinating
is that each of these different groups
of people
actually daydreamed about different
things okay
so people who are in the
grandiosity camp had daydreams of power
dominance
and wish fulfillment
people with separation anxiety had
daydreams of relationships
this is really important
um of extra attention
in in particular extra attention given
to them by illness
or some kind of vulnerability
and what does that mean that means that
when i daydream i think about man it
would be so awesome i haven't literally
have a daydream i don't actually think
it's awesome but i have a daydream about
man if i got cancer i would be in bed
all day and everyone would be coming to
see me and everyone would be bringing me
cake and food and like i just have this
like i build this complex fantasy in my
mind about this scenario in which i'm
ill or vulnerable in some way and all
these different kinds of people are
giving me attention
and with ann hader this is really
interesting for people who have
anhedonia
they have
daydreams of escape or physical violence
right so the people who are in hedonic
have daydreams where like something big
is happening i'm feeling something in
the daydream the rest of my life i don't
feel pleasure i feel numb all the time
but in my daydream like i'm fighting
someone someone's fighting for me i'm
fighting for my life i'm wrestling with
a shark you know i'm i'm wrestling with
like some kind of like i get attacked by
a jaguar
like there's there's or i'm being hunted
by something and i have to run away
so we start to see when we look at the
personality element
right so this isn't really neuroscience
this is not talking about attention or
the brain's capacity to dissociate when
i sit down and talk to people with
maladaptive daydreaming what i tend to
find is that there are three categories
of
sort of personality temperaments that
some people are grandiose some people
have separation anxiety and are afraid
of abandonment
and some people are anthodonic which
means that they don't feel pleasure and
that if i ask them what kind of
daydreams do you have they tend to
correlate with these three buckets okay
and so what we tried and this is what's
really important about maladaptive
daydreaming is that
people will say oh i daydream all the
time but it becomes important what you
daydream about
and so what people hypothesize is that
when i have this kind of brain
that tees me up to daydream
and i have some kind of unmet emotional
need
in my life
i end up with maladaptive daydreaming so
this is sort of like a you know it's
it's like an alchemical process where i
combine two ingredients
and i end up with a third so for example
if i have adhd brain
plus
i've been abandoned
i'm adopted or whatever my dad left you
know some kind of like thing
equals
maladaptive daydreaming if i have a
history of trauma so i have a
dissociation brain
and i'm an hedonic i can't feel anything
i'm numb
ends up with maladaptive daydreaming if
i have ocd
and i'm a low-wage worker and my boss is
mean to me and i have unmet needs of
power
and glory
i end up with maladaptive daydreaming
and this is why it's such a tricky
diagnosis to find it's because what
we've got is like discrete potentially
discrete neurological processes or maybe
it's one neurological process
over here
which manifests or looks like any of
these three things
and then i have an unmet emotional need
and then my brain decides to maladaptive
daydream so this is the way that it
fixes the problem so the reason that
maladaptive daydreaming is so hard to
get rid of is because it's actually a
fix to a problem right so i have a brain
that's easily distractible plus i feel
abandoned all the time so what does that
result in it's like i'm going about my
day
i'm trying to study
and i have this deep unmet emotional
need of like feeling secure about myself
and since my brain is so easily
distracted it always goes back to that
deep emotional need it's like an itch
that i have to scratch over and over and
over and over again and my lack of
attentional control plus my unmet
emotional need so a neuroscience
vulnerability plus an emotional
vulnerability
leads to this maladaptive daydreaming
okay
and so the interesting thing is so dr k
this is a very fascinating theory and it
sounds really cool that you're saying
neuroscience
vulnerability
plus unmet emotional need
equals maladaptive trade dreaming but is
that just like do you just make it sound
good or is there any like data to
support that and this is the coolest
paper that i found
okay
so
this is super cool okay but it's gonna
be hard so stay with me chat
so the first thing is that people looked
at this is something called
uh network theory for understanding
maladaptive daydreaming okay so network
theory sort of is kind of like what i'm
saying it's sort of this emergent
property
but what they sort of figured out is
they looked at maladaptive daydreaming
and they said that there are three
factors there are three kind of like
buckets of stuff going on with these
people
one is what they call kinesthesia and
music so this is where like
music triggers their daydreaming or they
use music to maintain their daydreaming
they somehow get lost in the music
another aspect of maladaptive
daydreaming is yearning so they want to
return to the daydream they're not
distressed at all when they're
daydreaming they get annoyed if they get
interrupted they prefer the daydream
they have a strong urge it's kind of an
enjoyable experience they call this
thing yearning this has to do with
factor analysis if you guys know what
that is we're not going to go into too
much detail
and then the third thing is impairment
so they have it interferes with their
daily chores the amount of time that
they daydream causes distress it's
difficulty to stay focused
they they
feel hindered in their life goals they
have difficulty controlling the daydream
it interferes with their work sound
familiar by the way chat
so these are the three
factors that are associated with
maladaptive daydreaming
and then what these researchers did is
they looked at emotional regulation and
what they asked themselves is if i look
at emotional regulation
does this
correlate with any of these three
factors so if someone has for example a
lack of emotional awareness are they
more likely to experience factor three
impairment and what they absolutely
discovered is that maladaptive
daydreaming can essentially be
correlated with emotional regulation
factors
and the other really interesting finding
that they had is that
there's one positive core
there's one important inverse
correlation which is the lack of
emotional clarity which is kind of
interesting so what they found is that
people who daydream a lot
can actually improve emotional clarity
over time so it's almost as if
maladaptive daydreamers are using
daydreaming as a method of processing
their own emotions and understanding
what they feel
as they go through all of these like
scenarios about feeling loved and and
being ill and people caring from them
they can actually gain insight into oh
this is me feeling like lonely they can
actually have some kind of emotional
regulation benefit or increase clarity
which is really really fascinating
so what they essentially found let me
find uh the key sentence here
um is
um
so
uh
associations were mostly positive
suggesting that in general
poor emotional regulation was linked
with a higher degree of uh
maladaptive daydreaming
symptoms right so this is the key thing
so the two nodes in the expanded network
with the highest strength centrality
were limited emotional regulation
strategies and difficulty controlling
the daydream okay so what this
essentially means
is that when i have a maladaptive
daydreamer
who has limited
emotional
regulation strategies
what are they more likely to do
when i take this person these are the
strongest correlations
this leads to maladaptive daydreaming
right
and so this is the kind of situation
where essentially we can tie things
together now
where we can see then this paper is a
really good example of our hypothesis
that when i have neuroscience
vulnerabilities and i have unmet
emotional needs
and there's a key thing here
plus
no other
way
to deal with it
this equals maladaptive date dreaming
do you guys get that
so essentially
what we see is that the more limited you
are in your emotional ability to
regulate your emotions the more limited
you are in your
right so let's look at these factors
so the more likely you are to not accept
your emotional responses right what does
that mean that means i have to escape
the more difficulty you have with goal
directed behaviors what does that mean
it means i get lost in in the daydream
the more impulse control difficulties
and by the way is this starting to look
like adhd oh yeah that's right remember
if you guys remember the neuroscience of
adhd lecture you remember that impulse
control difficulties and emotional
dysregulation are a key part of the
brain of
adhd
the more lack of emotional awareness
that you have the more limited emotional
regulation strategies you have and the
lack of emotional clarity you have the
more likely you are to retreat
into the daydream
right so we can sort of include those
six factors right here
and so there's one more thing that i'm
going to add
which is really unfortunate
so this is sort of this
vicious cycle of maladaptive daydreaming
so when you have maladaptive daydreaming
you leads to poor performance
right there's no awareness of this stuff
or this stuff so if you talk to people
with mallet after daydreaming maybe what
we can do is like look at a post so
we'll we'll test our hypothesis in a
second we'll pick a random reddit post
from our subreddit and we'll see if this
person has any sense or talks at all in
their post about unmet emotional needs
or their comorbidities because i would
suspect maybe this is different because
it's our community and our community
tends to be super self-aware
but
what we tend to have is maladaptive
daydreaming leads to poor performance
this in turn leads to emotional
frustration
i don't understand what's wrong with me
why can't i just focus why am i cursed
with maladaptive daydreaming
right this leads to self-blame
can you guys see where this is going
and this leads to maladaptive
daydreaming
right
and so as the emotional need increases
through maladaptive daydreaming
and by the way you shouldn't smoke pot
because marijuana seems to make this
worse
that's the one thing about drugs sorry
chat
right because remember marijuana is also
a coping mechanism
i'll pull up that paper if you guys want
to see it and so as the unmet emotional
unmet needs increase
and if you don't have abilities to cope
with it if you're not in therapy you
don't have good friends etc things like
that meditation we'll talk about this in
a second
then this is going to increase your
maladaptive daydreaming and then once we
increase it then we go the second round
right we do it again
we do it again and then this goes on for
a while then you're 30 years old
and then it's like meh my life is empty
and this is when you start thinking
about gg out right i'm not trying to be
cows here but
this this is what can happen so
maladaptive daydreaming can be a really
devastating
diagnosis so just to summarize
maladaptive daydreaming is something
that
is
increasingly common
right and so let's look at why is that
so this is the last thing so why is why
are so many people posting about
maladaptive daydreaming now
what's going on has it been that for 50
years maladaptive daydreaming has sort
of existed and people have just ignored
it or like is it a new thing is there
some maladapted daydreaming virus going
around what's going on the first is that
it seems to correlate with a lot of the
vulnerabilities that lead to gaming
disorder
so there's some correlation
between using gaming as an escape
and
uh
filling
unmet emotional needs
so there's something going on here where
like gaming and maladaptive daydreaming
essentially serve the same adaptive
mechanism right
second reason is
can anyone guess it
high heightened levels of maladaptive
daydreaming are associated with covid19
lockdown pre-existing psychiatric
diagnosis intensified psychological
dysfunction
you can always blame kovid chat you can
always blame coven
so it seems like there are reasons
why maladaptive daydreaming is worse so
remember
what is maladaptive daydreaming it is a
unhealthy coping mechanism which the
mind relies on
due to some way that it's wired so if i
have attentional problems or i
dissociate right or i'm obsessive my
mind has an obsessive thinking quality
to it like i'm on the ocd spectrum so my
brain is wired in one of those three
ways and then maladaptive daydreaming
emerges
as a way to manage your emotional needs
given those that sort of neuroscience
back backdrop
and once we add covet into the mix it
also escalates our emotional needs and
we end up being with more maladaptive
daydreaming
okay
now people are probably wondering what
do i do about it so i'm gonna echo once
again this is not a place where we can
give medical advice but here is how i
would approach
actually let's stop for a second
anyone have questions
how do you fix dissociation okay summary
please okay
so let's start with a summary can you
repeat all that okay
it's a lot okay so i'm gonna just talk
to y'all okay we're gonna move away from
this
all right so here's how to understand
maladaptive daydreaming in a nutshell
so the first thing is remember we
reviewed the comorbidity data which
suggested that people who maladaptive
daydream have a very lot high likelihood
of other psychiatric illnesses so does
that mean that it is a new illness
which is completely independent from
these other illnesses
no it actually suggests that there's
some kind of common process going on
the second thing that we discovered
is that
it appears that the type of daydreams
that people have
correlate with certain unmet emotional
needs and personality characteristics
okay so
and what that sort of
the third thing that we kind of talked
about
is that we found a very tight
correlation between inability to
understand
or regulate your own emotions and
maladaptive daydreaming
so what does this mean why do so many
people have maladaptive daydreaming and
why has it been so damn hard to diagnose
why are people just learning about it
now so my take on it is that there are
multiple different brains
that can get to maladaptive daydreaming
so one is the adhd brain in which case
you can't really control your attention
so since you can't control your
attention your mind wanders into the
daydream very very easily
another kind of brain is the obsessional
brain so fifty percent of people with
maladaptive daydreaming will also have
ocd or meet criteria for ocd so this is
a brain that obsesses over some thoughts
this is not attentional wandering this
is actually the opposite where it holds
on to a particular thought extra extra
time which happens to be the daydream
the third kind of thing that we tend to
see is an association with trauma okay
or dissociation and so this is a brain
that is able to pull myself out of my
current circumstances so if i'm sitting
at a cafe
and you know someone has left me the
bill
my mind will dissociate and i'll go off
into la la land and i'll enter the
maladaptive daydreaming for like three
hours and i'll just be sitting at the
cafe so the dissociative brain the
inattentive brain or the obsessional
brain can all result in maladaptive
daydreaming
the reason that each of those brains
daydreams is because there are on
unmet emotional needs they're the
grandiose emotional needs i'm i want to
be rich i want to be powerful i want to
be respected
there are the essentially loneliness
needs separation anxiety so i don't want
to be abandoned and i'm going to
fantasize about being cared for and
loved
the third thing is the anhedonic
personality which is my life is numb my
life is empty my i don't feel anything
so the daydreams that i have are about
survival escape physical violence things
like that it's not necessarily violence
against other people it's just very
emotionally charged fighting for your
life feeling something kind of dreams so
what we tend to have is when when you
have one of those people
who has one of those emotional unmet
emotional needs and then you stick that
emotional need in the brain of someone
with adhd dissociation or obsession
plus an inability to process that crap
through healthy coping mechanisms
or a lack of emotional awareness
you end up with maladaptive daydreaming
and that's kind of like where it comes
from
right
so it's sort of a combination of a brain
that is predisposed to particular things
plus unmet emotional needs so now people
are gonna say okay what do i do about it
dr k
and that's where i'd say
that depends but here's what i kind of
here's how i'd write it out okay so i
don't have a whole lot of clinical
experience with maladaptive daydreaming
so take this with a grain of salt but i
do feel pretty confident when i'm about
to say
so if you're talking about what to do
about it first thing you've got to do is
figure out what kind of neuroscience
vulnerability do you have
do you have attentional problems
dissociation
or identity problems
or obsessional
kind of thoughts right maybe anxiety is
in here too
i'm sort of skipping that past that one
for
reasons but
and then what you have to figure out is
what's my unmet emotional need
right do you fall into the grandiose
camp
do you fall into the separation anxiety
or do you fall into the anhedonic camp
and then what you have to do is figure
out coping strategies
and eq stuff
and so here what you got to do is
gain emotional clarity
develop
emotional regulation strategies
okay
next thing you got to do
drugs
stop weed
question
start
ssri some evidence of this okay
so if we kind of think about it
tackling maladaptive daydreaming what i
would do is address each of these
buckets
this is just how i practice psychiatry
so what i would do is with the
attentional person you know i teach a
particular meditation that trains their
attention which we'll do today
for your unmet emotional need you could
do psychotherapy for something like this
right so if you have separation anxiety
you could do psychotherapy
right so here you could even do
you know meds for adhd or meditation
and then for to gain emotional clarity
you can also do meditation or
psychotherapy
but i think actually this is like where
some of those like wellness retreats
like out in the woods
go find yourself
this stuff is really great here
develop emotional regulation uh
strategies so this is also where
meditation works great
but maybe you can do things like ice
diving
or wim hof breathing
etc okay
so this is sort of like where you've got
to like figure out okay which one of
these is it and you have to attack it
from all angles
so you have to address this from okay
what's going on in my brain do i have a
problem with attention then if you
increase your mind's ability to focus
then you won't get lost in the daydream
as easily you'll remove the neuroscience
vulnerability if you can meet the unmet
emotional need either through
psychotherapy or even like get into a
good relationship
right
get promoted
go do something fun like go hiking
actually hiking is not right here
go white water rafting
right
and then gain some emotional clarity
like go find yourself go meditate go
talk to someone you know
develop emotional regulation strategies
is there a couple of interesting things
so by the way one of the things that
we've sort of figured out recently is
that
so our the outcomes from our coaching
program seem to be really good and we've
had a lot of data points now
and we were really confused so our the
coaching program appears to be about as
efficacious
maybe about 70 to 100 percent as
effective as antidepressant medication
or
anxiety medication or maybe even as good
as psychotherapy it's not a treatment
for those things so we're not um you
know we're it's not designed to treat
depression or anxiety but we were just
really confused why
our coaching intervention
appears to be effective
for treating illnesses which it's not
don't sign up for coaching if you have a
mental illness that you're looking for
treatment for you should go see a
medical professional but we were
confused why it seems to be helpful
hopefully that doesn't sound like a
contradiction to people do people
understand the nuance there
and the reason is that we think that our
coaching program essentially boosts eq
so we're actually studying that right
now and that's simply by giving people
emotional clarity by giving people
emotional regulation strategies by
bringing awareness and
self-understanding
that it somehow seems to like
negate this stuff over here
which we're not quite sure how that
works we're just as confused as you all
are
right eq is emotional quotient so it's
like iq but for emotions
the other thing is that there is um if
you guys
if this is ringing
true to you there is a video in dr k's
guide called the fantasy trap
which targets sort of talks about these
unmet emotional needs
and uh sort of like goes into detail
about why we get stuck in fantasy and
what goes on in the mind when we're
having a fantasy
but in short if we're talking about
targeting maladaptive daydreaming you
know what i would do as a psychiatrist
if i were your doctor is to try to
approach each of these figure out what
is the neuroscientific vulnerability
what is the unmet emotional need and
what are the ways in which you process
your emotions and if you can work on all
threes all three i would have a
hypothesis that your maladaptive
daydreaming would get better
ah in what order there isn't an order
right these are all discrete processes
this is like sort of saying like if we
have a soup this is an emergent property
remember this is an emergent property
so it's like if i have
you know
water
plus
tomatoes
salt
to make a crappy soup
and i end up with soup over here right
the order isn't important what's
important is that all
three end up in there i mean i guess
technically order is important because
culinary stuff is different so maybe you
want to like roast the tomatoes first
and then add the salt and later add the
water so that's a bad analogy but and
maybe maybe that could be true for for
the the
this stuff too maybe there's a
particular order we just don't have any
data on on treatment
right
so i i don't think it's about order this
is where people like what order do i do
it in so
generally speaking when i work as a
psychiatrist i don't like
sometimes you have to do order but when
someone comes into my office i'll give
them a prescription i'll teach them to
meditate and i'll give them a diet plan
like all on day one like do it all
right
they're all independent things you can
do it in whatever order you want but
ideally you'd actually do all three
okay
so now
just do it all you're damn right
so here's the thing
so it's possible if we want to look at
it technically that doing any one of
these
is sufficient to end to deal with the
daydreaming it's possible that you don't
need to do all three
but this is the kind of thing where if
maladaptive daydreaming is ruining your
life i'd work i'd fire on all cylinders
right
so it's possible that if you just get
rid of the emotional need that the
maladaptive daydreaming will fall apart
it's very possible we just don't know
that there's no data to support you know
what's effective for maladaptive
daydreaming okay